This specific scenario—Parent p = new Child();—is the "Heart of Java." At Microsoft, they use this to see if you can distinguish between Type (the blueprint) and Instance (the reality).
Here is the detailed breakdown for your notes and interview prep.
1. Compile-Time (The "Security Guard" Phase)
Which one does the Compiler look at? The Reference Class (Parent).
The Logic: The compiler’s job is to ensure Safety. It doesn't know what will happen when the program actually runs; it only knows what you've promised.
The Check: When the compiler sees p.start(), it looks at the type of p. Since p is of type Parent, the compiler checks: "Does the Parent class have a method named start()?"
The Result:
If Parent has start(), the code compiles successfully.
If Parent does NOT have start(), the code fails to compile—even if the Child class has that method.
The Microsoft Analogy:
The reference Parent p is the Remote Control. If your remote doesn't have a "Start" button, you can't press it, regardless of how fancy the TV is.
2. Runtime (The "Action" Phase)
Which one does the JVM execute? The Actual Object Class (Child).
The Logic: Once the program is running, the JVM looks at the Actual Object sitting in the Heap memory.
The Mechanism (Dynamic Method Dispatch): The JVM follows the memory address stored in p to find the object. It sees that the object is actually an instance of Child.
The Execution: It checks if the Child class has overridden the start() method. If it has, the JVM executes the Child version. This is the essence of Runtime Polymorphism.
3. What happens in Memory? (Step-by-Step)
Imagine the code: Parent p = new Child();
Metaspace (Method Area): Java loads the class definitions for both Parent and Child. It creates a V-Table (Virtual Method Table) for both.
Parent V-Table: start() -> address of Parent's code.
Child V-Table: start() -> address of Child's code.
The Heap: A Child object is created. Inside this object, there is a hidden Class Pointer that points to the Child class definition in the Metaspace.
The Stack: A variable p is created. It stores the Memory Address of the Child object in the Heap.
The Call (p.start()):
The JVM looks at the address in p.
It jumps to the object in the Heap.
It follows the Class Pointer to find the Child class definition.
It looks up the V-Table of Child, finds start(), and executes the code at that specific address.
4. Summary for your Notes
Phase	Who is in charge?	Looks at...	Purpose
Compile-Time	Compiler (javac)	Reference Type (Parent)	To verify the method exists and is accessible.
Runtime	JVM	Object Type (Child)	To execute the most specific (overridden) version.
User
//Method Overloading and Riding
class Parent5{
Parent5(){
System.out.println("hii i am a parent constructor");
}
Parent5(int a){
System.out.println("hii i am a parent para constructor");
}
void play(int a, double b){
System.out.println(a+b);
}
void play(double a, int b){
System.out.println(a+b);
}
static void compute(){
System.out.println("hii parent");
}
}
class Child5 extends Parent5{
//    private ->default->protected->public
code
Code
static  void compute(){
    System.out.println("hii child");
}
void compute1(){
    System.out.println("another");
}
}
public class TheoryRev01 {
public static void main(String[] args) {
Parent5 p1=new Child5();
p1.compute();
//        p1.play(10,10.0);
code
Code
}
}
but see here parent is been runn
Model
ThinkingThoughts
Expand to view model thoughts

chevron_right
You have just discovered one of the most famous "trick" questions in Java technical interviews!
Your observation is 100% correct: The Parent's method runs. But why?
This happens because you used the static keyword. In a Microsoft interview, this is the distinction between Method Overriding and Method Hiding.
1. The Rule: Static Binding (Method Hiding)
When a method is static, it does not use the "Dynamic Method Dispatch" (the TV analogy) we discussed. Instead, it uses Static Binding.
Instance Methods (Non-static): The JVM looks at the Object in the Heap at Runtime. (Overriding).
Static Methods: The JVM looks at the Reference Type at Compile-time. (Hiding).
In your code:
Parent5 p1
←
←
 The Reference Type is Parent5.
p1.compute() is a call to a static method.
The compiler says: "Since the reference is Parent5, I will bond this call to Parent5.compute() right now."
It doesn't even bother looking at the Child5 object in the heap.
2. Method Overriding vs. Method Hiding
Feature	Method Overriding (Instance)	Method Hiding (Static)
Keyword	No static	Uses static
Binding	Dynamic (Runtime)	Static (Compile-time)
Decided by	The Object (new Child5())	The Reference (Parent5 p1)
Result in your code	Would print "hii child"	Prints "hii parent"
3. The "Interview Catch"
If I were your Microsoft interviewer, I would ask you this follow-up:
Interviewer: "If I remove the word static from both Parent5.compute() and Child5.compute(), what will the output be?"
The Answer: It would print "hii child".
Why? Because without static, it becomes a normal instance method. The JVM will use Dynamic Method Dispatch, look at the actual Child5 object in the heap, see the overridden method, and run it.
4. Why does Java do this? (Deep Logic for Notes)
static means "belonging to the class."
Because static members belong to the class blueprint and not the individual house (object), Java designers decided they should be linked as early as possible (at compile-time) to make the program faster.
🏋️ Revision Exercise:
Try this in your IDE:
Remove the static keyword from both compute() methods in your code.
Run the code again.
Observe how the output changes to "hii child".
This proves that polymorphism ONLY works for instance methods!
